1. Basic Switch and end Device Configuration

1.1 Cisco IOS Access
purpose of an OS:
	PC: use GUI
	CLI-based network OS: use shell
	
Access Methods:
	Console: physical management port
	SSH: secure remote connection
	Telnet	insecure remote connection
	
Terminal Emulation Programs:
	are used to connect to a network device by either a console port or by an SSH/Telnet connection.

1.2 IOS Navigation
Primary Command Modes:
	User EXEC Mode (>): access to a limited number of basic monitoring commands
	Privileged EXEC Mode (#): access to all commands and features
	Global Configuration Mode (config): access configuration options on the device
	Line Configuration Mode (config-line):  configure console, SSH, Telnet or AUX acces
	Interface Configuration Mode (config-if): configure a switch port or router interface
	
Subconfiguration Modes:
	move from one subconfiguration mode to another, type in the subconfiguration mode command.
	(example: from config-line → interface)
	
1.3 The Command Structure

Basic IOS Command Structure:
	Prompt
	Command
	Space
	Keyword / Argument

Keyword: specific parameter defined in the operating system
Argument: not predefined, is a value or variable defined by the user

IOS Command Syntax Check
A command might require one or more arguments. To determine the keywords and arguments required for a command,
refer to the command syntax.

	boldface: commands and keywords
	italic: arguments
	[x]: optional element
	{x}: required element
	[x{y|z}]: required choice within an optional element.
	
IOS Help Features
two forms of help:
	Context-sensitive help
	Command syntax check:
		verifies that a valid command was entered by the user.

Hot Keys and Shortcuts

Commands and keywords can be shortened to the minimum number of characters that identify a unique selection

	Tab: Completes a partial command
	Backspace: Erases the character to the left of the cursor
	Left Arrow or Ctrl+B: Moves the cursor one character to the left.
	Right Arrow or Ctrl+F: Moves the cursor one character to the right.
	Up Arrow or Ctrl+P: Recalls the commands in the history buffer, beginning with the most recent commands.

When command output shows more text than can be displayed in a terminal, the IOS will display a “--More--” prompt.
	Enter Key: Shows next line
	Space bar: displays next screen
	Any other key: ends the display string returning to priveleged exec mode
	Ctrl-C: in any configuration mode, ends the configuration mode and returns to privileged EXEC mode
	Ctrl-Z: in any configuration mode, ends the configuration mode and returns to privileged EXEC mode
	Ctrl-Shift-6: All-purpose break sequence

1.4 Basic Device Configuration
Device Names: first configuration command on any device should be to give it a unique hostname

Configure Passwords

Securing user EXEC mode access:
	First enter line console configuration mode using the line console 0 command in global configuration mode.
	Next, specify the user EXEC mode password using the password password command.
	Finally, enable user EXEC access using the login command.
	
Securing privileged EXEC mode access:
	First enter global configuration mode.
	Next, use the enable secret password command.
	
Securing VTY (virtual teletype) line access:
	First enter line VTY configuration mode using the line vty 0 15 command in global configuration mode.
	Next, specify the VTY password using the password password command.
	Finally, enable VTY access using the login command
	
Encrypt Passwords:
	The startup-config and running-config files display most passwords in plaintext.
	To encrypt all plaintext passwords, use the service password-encryption global config command.
	Use the show running-config command to verify that the passwords on the device are now encrypted.
	
Banner Messages:
	A banner message is important to warn unauthorized personnel from attempting to access the device.
	To create a banner message of the day on a network device, use the banner motd # the message of the day # global config command.

1.5 Save Configurations
Configuration Files

two system files that store the device configuration:
	startup-config: stored in NVRAM
	running-config:stored in RAM
	
save changes made to the running configuration to the startup configuration file:
copy running-config startup-config

Alter the Running Configurations
restore:
	Remove the changed commands individually.
	Reload the device using the reload command.
clear all configurations:
	erase startup-config

Capture Configuration to a Text File:
	Step 1. Open terminal emulation software, such as PuTTY or Tera Term, that is already connected to a switch.
	Step 2. Enable logging in to the terminal software and assign a name and file location to save the log file.
		The figure displays that All session output will be captured to the file specified (i.e., MySwitchLogs)
	Step 3. Execute the show running-config or show startup-config command at the privileged EXEC prompt.
		Text displayed in the terminal window will be placed into the chosen file.
	Step 4. Disable logging in the terminal software.
		The figure shows how to disable logging by choosing the None session logging option
	
1.6 Ports and Addresses
IP Addresses:
	The use of IP addresses is the primary means of enabling devices to locate one another and establish
		end-to-end communication on the internet.
	The structure of an IPv4 address is called dotted decimal notation and is represented by four decimal numbers
		between 0 and 255.
	An IPv4 subnet mask is a 32-bit value that differentiates the network portion of the address from the host portion.
		Coupled with the IPv4 address, the subnet mask determines to which subnet the device is a member.
	The default gateway address is the IP address of the router that the host will use to access remote networks,
		including the internet.
	
	IPv6 addresses are 128 bits in length and written as a string of hexadecimal values. Every four bits is
		represented by a single hexadecimal digit; for a total of 32 hexadecimal values. Groups of four hexadecimal
		digits are separated by a colon “:”.
	IPv6 addresses are not case-sensitive and can be written in either lowercase or uppercase.
	
Interfaces and Ports:
Network communications depend on end user device interfaces, networking device interfaces, and the cables that connect
	them.
Types of network media include twisted-pair copper cables, fiber-optic cables, coaxial cables, or wireless.
Different types of network media have different features and benefits.
	Some of the differences between various types of media include:
		Distance the media can successfully carry a signal
		Environment in which the media is to be installed
		Amount of data and the speed at which it must be transmitted
		Cost of the media and installation
	
1.7 Configure IP Addressing
Manual IP addressing:
End devices on the network need an IP address in order to communicate with other devices on the network.
IPv4 address information can be entered into end devices manually, or automatically using Dynamic Host Configuration
	Protocol (DHCP).
		To manually configure an IPv4 address on a Windows PC, open the Control Panel > Network Sharing Center >
			Change adapter settings and choose the adapter. Next right-click and select Properties to display the
			Local Area Connection Properties.
		Next, click Properties to open the Internet Protocol Version 4 (TCP/IPv4) Properties window.
			Then configure the IPv4 address and subnet mask information, and default gateway.
			
Automatic IP Addressing:
	DHCP enables automatic IPv4 address configuration for every end device that is DHCP-enabled.
	End devices are typically by default using DHCP for automatic IPv4 address configuration.
	To configure DHCP on a Windows PC, open the Control Panel > Network Sharing Center > Change adapter settings
		and choose the adapter. Next right-click and select Properties to display the Local Area Connection Properties.
	Next, click Properties to open the Internet Protocol Version 4 (TCP/IPv4) Properties window, then select Obtain an
		IP address automatically and Obtain DNS server address automatically.

Switch Virtual Interface Configuration
To access the switch remotely, an IP address and a subnet mask must be configured on the SVI (switch virtual interface).
To configure an SVI on a switch:
	Enter the interface vlan 1 command in global configuration mode.
	Next assign an IPv4 address using the ip address ip-address subnet-mask command.
	Finally, enable the virtual interface using the no shutdown command

2.1 The Rules
Communications Fundamentals:
Networks can vary in size and complexity. It is not enough to have a connection, devices must agree on “how”
	to communicate.
There are three elements to any communication:
	There will be a source (sender).
	There will be a destination (receiver).
	There will be a channel (media) that provides for the path of communications to occur.

Communications Protocols
	All communications are governed by protocols.
	Protocols are the rules that communications will follow.
	These rules will vary depending on the protocol

Rule Establishment
	Protocols must account for the following requirements:
		An identified sender and receiver
		Common language and grammar
		Speed and timing of delivery
		Confirmation or acknowledgment requirements

Network Protocol Requirements
Common computer protocols must be in agreement and include the following requirements:
	Message encoding
	Message formatting and encapsulation
	Message size
	Message timing
	Message delivery options

Message Timing:
	
	Flow Control – Manages the rate of data transmission
	Response Timeout – Manages how long a device waits when it does not hear a reply from the destination.
	Access method - Determines when someone can send a message.
	
Message Delivery Option:
	Unicast – one to one communication
	Multicast – one to many, typically not all
	Broadcast – one to all

2.2 Protocols
Network Protocol Functions
	Addressing: Identifies sender and receiver
	Reliability: Provides guaranteed delivery
	Flow Control: Ensures data flows at an efficient rate
	Sequencing: Uniquely labels each transmitted segment of data
	Error Detection: Determines if data became corrupted during transmission
	Application Interface: Process-to-process communications between network applications
	
Protocol Interaction
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP):
	Governs the way a web server and a web client interact
	Defines content and format Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP)
	Manages the individual conversations
	Provides guaranteed delivery
	Manages flow control
	
Internet Protocol (IP):
	Delivers messages globally from the sender to the receiver
	Ethernet Delivers messages from one NIC to another NIC on the same Ethernet Local Area Network (LAN)
	
2.3 Protocol Suites

